Weibenfalks first blog post (#201)
tinacms/tinacms-site: content/blog/three-ways-to-edit-md.md

---
title: Three ways to edit Markdown with Tina + Gatsby
date: '2020-01-02T07:00:00.000Z'
author: Thomas Weibenfalk
draft: false

> ---

Author: Hmm.. is this "consumes" in the markdown? What is this for? 

consumes:
  - file: /packages/@tinacms/api-git/src/server.ts
    details: Uses tina-git-server

> ---

Reviewer: We use this metadata to keep track of when we need to update documentation or information shared in a blog post. There's a danger script that will prompt a documentation issue to be made when that file in the Tina codebase is changed. So basically we need to map anything from the Tina source code to reference what is laid out in this post. You could check out this file for a reference on some of the Tina files this blog would be 'dependent' on, specifically with the functions that work with markdown - https://github.com/tinacms/tinacms-site/blob/master/content/docs/gatsby/markdown.md

> ---

Reviewer: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tinacms/tinacms-site/master/content/docs/gatsby/markdown.md -- it's easier to see in the raw version

Supercharge your static site with real time content editing!
In this post I will explore the three different methods Tina offers to edit markdown on your Gatsby site. You’ll learn how to setup Tina with both Page Queries and Static Queries.

This post will not cover the basic, initially, setup of Tina that is needed. For a full documentation on how to initially setup Tina with Gatsby and Markdown files visit the official [docs](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/manual-setup).

> ## What’s the deal with page queries and static queries?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What’s the deal with Page Queries and Static Queries?
```

Before we dive down into editing markdown with Tina we have to understand how Gatsby handles querying data with GraphQL. You can source data from almost anywhere in Gatsby. In our case we’re using markdown. When you build your site, Gatsby creates a GraphQL schema for all the data. Then you use GraphQL in your React components to query your sourced data. If you don’t know about GraphQL you can read more [here](https://graphql.org/learn/).

Gatsby allows you to query your data in two ways; Page Queries and Static Queries.

> Since the release of the React Hooks API and the useStaticQuery hook in Gatsby it is very easy to query your data. There are cases when you can’t use a Static Query though. First let’s explore the differences. As usual you can find more information in the excellent Gatsby [documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/static-vs-normal-queries/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the release of the [React Hooks API](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-intro.html) and the [`useStaticQuery` hook](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/use-static-query/) in Gatsby, it is very easy to query your data. There are cases when you can’t use a Static Query though. First let’s explore the differences. As usual you can find more information in the excellent Gatsby [documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/static-vs-normal-queries/).
```

### The two main differences are:

- Page queries can accept GraphQL variables. Static queries can’t.

- Page queries can only be added on page components. Static queries can be used in all components.

So, why can’t we use GraphQL variables in a Static query? The reason for that is a static query doesn’t have access to the page context like a page query does. The result is that a static query won’t be able to access variables that are defined in the page context. You can define the page context in your gatsby-node.js file in your createPage function. Here you can supply your page with different variables that will get injected to your page on build time.

> I use static queries as much as possible because I love the hooks API and the ease of use and composition possibilities it brings. For example you can create custom hooks and reuse them in multiple components. Let’s say that you have a graphQL query that grabs metadata that you want on multiple pages. Just create a custom React hook with the useStaticQuery Gatsby hook inside of it. Then you can use your own custom hook wherever you want and always easily get that data into your component. When you need to have variables in your component, you have to use a Page Query. Page Queries cannot be used with the hooks api and have to be unique and attached to the specific page component.

Reviewer: There's some capitalization inconsistency with 'Static Query' and 'Page Query', let's decide whether were always going to capitalize or go lower case and make that consistent throughout the whole blog.

> I use static queries as much as possible because I love the hooks API and the ease of use and composition possibilities it brings. For example you can create custom hooks and reuse them in multiple components. Let’s say that you have a graphQL query that grabs metadata that you want on multiple pages. Just create a custom React hook with the useStaticQuery Gatsby hook inside of it. Then you can use your own custom hook wherever you want and always easily get that data into your component. When you need to have variables in your component, you have to use a Page Query. Page Queries cannot be used with the hooks api and have to be unique and attached to the specific page component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I use static queries as much as possible because I love the hooks API and the ease of use and composition possibilities it brings. For example you can create custom hooks and reuse them in multiple components. Let’s say that you have a graphQL query that grabs metadata that you want on multiple pages. Just create a custom React hook with the `useStaticQuery` Gatsby hook inside of it. Then you can use your own custom hook wherever you want and always easily get that data into your component. When you need to have variables in your component, you have to use a Page Query. Page Queries cannot be used with the hooks api and have to be unique and attached to the specific page component.
```

> Another great thing with static queries is that you can grab the data in the component that needs the data. That prevents prop drilling and your data is more tightly coupled to the component where it is used. The infamous prop drilling in React is when you have to pass down data via props to components deep down in the component tree. Read more on prop drilling in [this](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling) excellent blog post from Kent C Dodds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another great thing with static queries is that you can grab the data in the component that needs the data. That prevents prop drilling and your data is more tightly coupled to the component where it is used. The infamous [prop drilling](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling) in React is when you have to pass down data via props to components deep down in the component tree.
```

## React overview

> As we’ve learned Gatsby has two types of queries; Page queries and Static queries. So we have to choose which one is suitable for our needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we’ve learned, Gatsby has two types of queries: Page queries and Static queries. So we have to choose which one is suitable for our needs.
```

> In addition to this, React also offers a couple of options for us to choose from. You can either create your component as a class or a functional component. Prior to the React Hooks API, you had to use class components to have state in your components. Now, with hooks, you can do this with functional components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to this, React also offers a couple of options for us to choose from. You can either create your component as a [class or a functional component](https://reactjs.org/docs/components-and-props.html). Prior to the React Hooks API, you had to use class components to have state in your components. Now with hooks, you can do this with functional components.
```

## Three ways to edit markdown with Tina
Tina provides methods for editing markdown with both class and functional components in React. We also know that we can have both page queries and static queries in our Gatsby components. So we have to choose the most suitable approach for us. Tina gives us three different approaches as described below.

- **useLocalRemarkForm** - A React Hook that is intended for functional components that source data from a static query using Gatsby’s useStaticQuery.

> - **RemarkForm** - A Render Props Component that you can use in class components that source data from a static query using Gatsby’s StaticQuery render props component.

Reviewer: We should reword both `RemarkForm` and `useRemarkForm` to note that they can be used with any component, page components as well. I know this is mentioned later on but let's be clear up front.

Reviewer: By 'any component', I mean both page and non-page components.

> - **RemarkForm** - A Render Props Component that you can use in class components that source data from a static query using Gatsby’s StaticQuery render props component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **RemarkForm** - [A Render Props Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/render-props.html) that you can use in class components that source data from a static query using Gatsby’s StaticQuery render props component.
```

> - **remarkForm** - A Higher Order Component. Please note the subtle difference here! The only difference in naming from the render props component is the lowercase “r”. This one is used when you source data from a Page Query in Gatsby.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **remarkForm** - [A Higher Order Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html). Please note the subtle difference here! The only difference in naming from the render props component is the lowercase “r”. This one is used when you source data from a Page Query in Gatsby.
```

> If you want to read more about the three different approaches you can visit the TinaCMS docs [here](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to read more about the three different approaches you can visit the [TinaCMS docs](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown).
```

### remarkForm - How to use it and why it won’t work with static queries.
First … Let’s dive into how to hook up TinaCMS with a page query.

> The remarkForm Component in TinaCMS is a [Higher Order Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html), a HOC in short. This means that it is a function that takes in another component and will return a new component that has added functionality to it. If you’re not familiar with HOC:s I suggest you do some googling around and read more about it. They are concidered “advanced usage” in the React world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `remarkForm` Component in TinaCMS is a [Higher Order Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html), a HOC in short. This means that it is a function that takes in another component and will return a new component that has added functionality to it. If you’re not familiar with HOC:s I suggest you do some googling around and read more about it. They are concidered “advanced usage” in the React world.
```

> So … the remarkForm component wants another component as an argument and is intended for Page queries. A page query injects the data as a prop to the component and we access the data from this prop. With a useStaticQuery hook the the data is collected in a variable, that you choose, inside the component itself. That means if you´re using the useStaticQuery hook in Gatsby you won’t have a component to give the remarkForm HOC. Bummer! 😞That’s why you can only use the remarkForm component on page queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So … the `remarkForm` component wants another component as an argument and is intended for Page queries. A page query injects the data as a prop to the component and we access the data from this prop. With a `useStaticQuery` hook the the data is collected in a variable, that you choose, inside the component itself. That means if you're using the `useStaticQuery` hook in Gatsby you won’t have a component to give the `remarkForm` HOC. Bummer! 😞That’s why you can only use the `remarkForm` component on page queries.
```

So how do you use this component with a page query in Gatsby? First, check out the fictive Star Wars component below. It will show the three steps needed to hook everything up:

```javascript
// 1. Import the `remarkForm` HOC
import { remarkForm } from 'gatsby-tinacms-remark'

const StarWarsMovie = ({ data: { markdownRemark } }) => {
  return <h1>{markdownRemark.frontmatter.title}</h1>
}

// 2. Wrap your component with `remarkForm`
export default remarkForm(StarWarsMovie)

// 3. Add the required ...TinaRemark fragment to your page query
export const pageQuery = graphql`
  query StarWarsMovieById($id: String!) {
    markdownRemark(fields: { id: { eq: $id } }) {
      id
      html
      frontmatter {
        title
        releaseDate
        crawl
      }
      ...TinaRemark
    }
  }
`
```

The above code is a component that displays information about Star Wars movies. For now, it just displays a header though. But it could also display the release date and the crawl text in the intro to the film as we’re specifying those fields in the GraphQL query. But that’s another story in a galaxy far far away from here ...

> The first step in this example is to import the remarkForm hook from the Gatsby plugin ‘gatsby-tinacms-remark’. This is the plugin that makes TinaCMS work with Markdown files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step in this example is to import the `remarkForm` hook from the Gatsby plugin ‘gatsby-tinacms-remark’. This is the plugin that makes TinaCMS work with Markdown files.
```

> There’s no need to do any additions to the code inside of the component itself. It could be any component, structured in the way you want it. The only thing you have to do with the component itself is to wrap your component with the remarkForm HOC when you export it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There’s no need to do any additions to the code inside of the component itself. It could be any component, structured in the way you want it. The only thing you have to do with the component itself is to wrap your component with the `remarkForm` HOC when you export it.
```

One more thing you have to do before you are good to go is to add the GraphQL fragment “...TinaRemark” in your query. This is needed for TinaCMS to recognize your data and create the required editor fields in the TinaCMS sidebar. After that you only have to start up your dev server to show the site and the Tina sidebar.

Easy enough isn’t it? Just three small steps and you’ll have a beautiful sidebar to edit your content on your site. 🤟

But what if you want to use a Static query and not a Page query?

### useLocalRemarkForm to the rescue!

> We’ve learned that the remarkForm HOC won’t work on static queries. So we’ll have to find another solution to hook up our useStaticQuery data with TinaCMS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ve learned that the `remarkForm` HOC won’t work on static queries. So we’ll have to find another solution to hook up our `useStaticQuery` data with TinaCMS.
```

> Great news! remarkForm uses a hook that is called useLocalRemarkForm internally. So RemarkForm is really just a “wrapper” for the useLocalRemarkForm hook. The remarkForm component takes in a component as an argument, calls useLocalRemarkForm with the page query data and returns a new component with the query data and TinaCMS connected to it. That’s all that it does! Therefore we can use the useLocalRemarkForm hook directly ourselves, without using the remarkForm HOC. Please note that you can of course use the useLocalRemarkForm hook on Page queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Great news! remarkForm uses a hook that is called useLocalRemarkForm internally. So RemarkForm is really just a “wrapper” for the useLocalRemarkForm hook. The remarkForm component takes in a component as an argument, calls useLocalRemarkForm with the page query data and returns a new component with the query data and TinaCMS connected to it. That’s all that it does! Therefore we can use the `useLocalRemarkForm` hook directly ourselves, without using the `remarkForm` HOC. Please note that you can of course use the `useLocalRemarkForm` hook on Page queries.
```

As before … Take a look at the code example below first. For the sake of the simplicity in this post I’ve left out code that shows the image. So it just displays a header now.

```javascript
// 1. Import useLocalRemarkForm custom hook
import React from ‘react’;
import { useLocalRemarkForm } from ‘gatsby-tinacms-remark’;
import { useStaticQuery } from ‘gatsby’;

const StarWarsMovie = () => {
  // 2. Add requried TinaCMS fragment to the GrahpQL query
    const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`
      query StarWarsMovieById {
        markdownRemark(fields: { id: { eq: "sw-01" } }) {
          id
          html
          frontmatter {
            title
            releaseDate
            crawl
          }
          ...TinaRemark
        }
      }
    `);
  // 3. Call the useLocalRemarkForm hook and pass in the data
  const [markdownRemark] = useLocalRemarkForm(data.markdownRemark);
  return <h1>{markdownRemark.frontmatter.title}</h1>
}

export default StarWarsMovie;

```

> Please note that this is just an example component illustrating how useLocalRemarkForm works. In the real world it would not be an optimal solution using a static query for this. That’s because, as you can see, you can’t use variables inside the useStaticQuery hook to make it dynamic. You have to hardcode the movie id. So this query will work for that specific movie only, which is no good.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that this is just an example component illustrating how `useLocalRemarkForm` works. In the real world it would not be an optimal solution using a static query for this. That’s because, as you can see, you can’t use variables inside the `useStaticQuery` hook to make it dynamic. You have to hardcode the movie id. So this query will work for that specific movie only, which is no good.
```

> Let’s break down what’s happening here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s break down what’s happening here:
```

> 1. We import the useLocalRemarkForm custom hook so we can use it in our component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. We import the `useLocalRemarkForm` custom hook so we can use it in our component.
```

2. Just as before, the ...TinaCMS fragment is needed in the GraphQL query. So we add that one there.

> 3. When we’ve got our data back from the Gatsby useStaticQuery hook we can call the TinaCMS useLocalRemarkForm hook with that data. This hook will return an array with two elements. The first element is practically the data that we called the hook with. It has the same shape and is ready for us to use in our component. The second element is a reference to the Tina form. We don’t actually need that one so we don’t destructure it out as we do with the markdownRemark.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. When we’ve got our data back from the Gatsby useStaticQuery hook we can call the TinaCMS `useLocalRemarkForm` hook with that data. This hook will return an array with two elements. The first element is practically the data that we called the hook with. It has the same shape and is ready for us to use in our component. The second element is a reference to the Tina form. We don’t actually need that one so we don’t destructure it out as we do with the __markdownRemark__.
```

> If you wonder about this line:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're wondering about this line:
```

```javascript
const [markdownRemark] = useLocalRemarkForm(heroData.markdownRemark)
```

> It is ES6 destructuring of the array I’m doing here. As we get an array with two elements back I’m destructuring out the first element (which is our data) and name it markdownRemark. You can name it whatever you want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is an example of [ES6 destructuring](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment). As we get an array with two elements back, I destructure out the first element (which is our data) and name it `markdownRemark`. You can name it whatever you want.
```

First, take a look at below example:

```javascript
// 1. import the RemarkForm render prop component
import { RemarkForm } from '@tinacms/gatsby-tinacms-remark'

class StarWarsMovie extends React.Component {
  render() {
    /*
     ** 2. Return RemarkForm, pass in markdownRemark
     **    to the remark prop and pass in what you
     **    want to render to the render prop
     */
    return (
      <RemarkForm
        remark={this.props.data.markdownRemark}
        render={({ markdownRemark }) => {
          return <h1>{markdownRemark.frontmatter.title}</h1>
        }}
      />
    )
  }
}

export default StarWarsMovie

// 3. Add the required ...TinaRemark fragment to your page query
export const pageQuery = graphql`
  query StarWarsMovieById($id: String!) {
    markdownRemark(fields: { id: { eq: $id } }) {
      id
      html
      frontmatter {
        title
        releaseDate
        crawl
      }
      ...TinaRemark
    }
  }
`
```

> Ok, yet again, let’s see what’s happening here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ok, yet again, let’s see what’s happening here:
```

> 1. We import the RemarkForm component for us to use in our code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. We import the `RemarkForm` component for us to use in our code.
```

> 2. In our return statement we return the RemarkForm component and give it it’s predefined, and required, props. The remark prop will provide RemarkForm with the data that we grabbed from our markdown file with our page query. We get this data injected to our page component in the data prop. So we pass that through. We just need the markdownRemark from the data object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In our return statement we return the `RemarkForm` component and give it it’s predefined, and required, props. The remark prop will provide `RemarkForm` with the data that we grabbed from our markdown file with our page query. We get this data injected to our page component in the data prop. So we pass that through. We just need the `markdownRemark` from the data object.
```

   The render prop gets the JSX that we want to render. In this case it’s only an H1 tag.

>    This is a function that will be called by the RemarkForm component. And this is a render prop! RemarkForm will hook up Tina for editing the data and then render whatever is specified in the render prop function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This is a function that will be called by the `RemarkForm` component. And this is a render prop! `RemarkForm` will hook up Tina for editing the data and then render whatever is specified in the render prop function.
```

3. Just as before we have to add the ...TinaRemark fragment to the page query.

This is it. Three ways of using Tina for editing frontmatter files in Gatsby.

## Next steps

> In this post we learned about how to setup Tina with both Static queries and Page queries in Gatsby. We also learned about three different ways to edit markdown with Tina. This is just the basics to get you started. If you like Tina and want to learn more you should checkout the [Tina official docs](https://tinacms.org/docs/). There’s a lot more stuff to read there and some interesting use cases. For example you can learn how to apply inline editing and also how to customize the form fields in the Tina sidebar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post we learned about how to setup Tina with both Static queries and Page queries in Gatsby. We also learned about three different ways to edit markdown with Tina. This is just the basics to get you started. If you like Tina and want to learn more you should checkout the [Tina official docs](https://tinacms.org/docs/). There’s a lot more stuff to read there and some interesting use cases. For example you can learn how to apply [inline editing](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/inline-editing) and also how to [customize the form fields](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown#customizing-remark-forms) in the Tina sidebar.
```

---
title: Three ways to edit Markdown with Tina + Gatsby
date: '2020-01-02T07:00:00.000Z'
author: Thomas Weibenfalk
draft: false
---

###Introduction
Supercharge your static site with real time content editing!

> In this post I will explore the three different methods Tina offers to edit markdown on your Gatsby site. You’ll learn how to setup Tina with both Page Queries and Static Queries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this post I will explore the three different methods Tina offers to edit Markdown on your Gatsby site. You’ll learn how to setup Tina with both Page Queries and Static Queries.
```

This post will not cover the basic, initially, setup of Tina that is needed. For a full documentation on how to initially setup Tina with Gatsby and Markdown files visit the official [docs](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/manual-setup).

###What’s the deal with page queries and static queries?

> Before we dive down into editing markdown with Tina we have to understand how Gatsby handles querying data with GraphQL. You can source data from almost anywhere in Gatsby. In our case we’re using markdown. When you build your site, Gatsby creates a GraphQL schema for all the data. Then you use GraphQL in your React components to query your sourced data. If you don’t know about GraphQL you can read more [here](https://graphql.org/learn/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before we dive down into editing Markdown with Tina we have to understand how Gatsby handles querying data with GraphQL. You can source data from almost anywhere in Gatsby. In our case we’re using Markdown. When you build your site, Gatsby creates a GraphQL schema for all the data. Then you use [GraphQL](https://graphql.org/learn/) in your React components to query your sourced data.
```

Gatsby allows you to query your data in two ways; Page Queries and Static Queries.
Since the release of the React Hooks API and the useStaticQuery hook in Gatsby it is very easy to query your data. There are cases when you can’t use a Static Query though. First let’s explore the differences. As usual you can find more information in the excellent Gatsby [documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/static-vs-normal-queries/).

The two main differences are:

- Page queries can accept GraphQL variables. Static queries can’t.

- Page queries can only be added on page components. Static queries can be used in all components.

> So, why can’t we use GraphQL variables in a Static query? The reason for that is a static query doesn’t have access to the page context like a page query does. The result is that a static query won’t be able to access variables that are defined in the page context. You can define the page context in your gatsby-node.js file in your createPage function. Here you can supply your page with different variables that will get injected to your page on build time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, why can’t we use GraphQL variables in a Static query? The reason for that is a static query doesn’t have access to the page context like a page query does. The result is that a static query won’t be able to access variables that are defined in the page context. You can define the page context in your `gatsby-node.js` file in your `createPage` function. Here you can supply your page with different variables that will get injected to your page on build time.
```

Another great thing with static queries is that you can grab the data in the component that needs the data. That prevents prop drilling and your data is more tightly coupled to the component where it is used. The infamous prop drilling in React is when you have to pass down data via props to components deep down in the component tree. Read more on prop drilling in [this](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling) excellent blog post from Kent C Dodds.

###React overview
As we’ve learned Gatsby has two types of queries; Page queries and Static queries. So we have to choose which one is suitable for our needs.

In addition to this, React also offers a couple of options for us to choose from. You can either create your component as a class or a functional component. Prior to the React Hooks API, you had to use class components to have state in your components. Now, with hooks, you can do this with functional components.

> ###Three ways to edit markdown with Tina

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
###Three ways to edit Markdown with Tina
```

> Tina provides methods for editing markdown with both class and functional components in React. We also know that we can have both page queries and static queries in our Gatsby components. So we have to choose the most suitable approach for us. Tina gives us three different approaches as described below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tina provides methods for editing Markdown with both class and functional components in React. We also know that we can have both page queries and static queries in our Gatsby components. So we have to choose the most suitable approach for us. Tina gives us three different approaches as described below.
```

> - **useLocalRemarkForm** - A React Hook that is intended for functional components that source data from a static query using Gatsby’s useStaticQuery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **useLocalRemarkForm** - A React Hook that is intended for functional components that source data from a static query using Gatsby’s `useStaticQuery`.
```

- **RemarkForm** - A Render Props Component that you can use in class components that source data from a static query using Gatsby’s StaticQuery render props component.

- **remarkForm** - A Higher Order Component. Please note the subtle difference here! The only difference in naming from the render props component is the lowercase “r”. This one is used when you source data from a Page Query in Gatsby.

If you want to read more about the three different approaches you can visit the TinaCMS docs [here](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown).

###remarkForm - How to use it and why it won’t work with static queries.
First … Let’s dive into how to hook up TinaCMS with a page query.

> The remarkForm Component in TinaCMS is a [Higher Order Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html), a HOC in short. This means that it is a function that takes in another component and will return a new component that has added functionality to it. If you’re not familiar with HOC:s I suggest you do some googling around and read more about it. They are concidered “advanced usage” in the React world.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The remarkForm Component in TinaCMS is a [Higher Order Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html), a HOC in short. This means that it is a function that takes in another component and will return a new component that has added functionality to it. If you’re not familiar with HOC:s I suggest you do some googling around and read more about it. They are considered “advanced usage” in the React world.
```

So how do you use this component with a page query in Gatsby? First, check out the fictive Star Wars component below. It will show the three steps needed to hook everything up:

```javascript
// 1. Import the `remarkForm` HOC
import { remarkForm } from 'gatsby-tinacms-remark'

const StarWarsMovie = ({ data: { markdownRemark } }) => {
  return <h1>{markdownRemark.frontmatter.title}</h1>
}

// 2. Wrap your component with `remarkForm`
export default remarkForm(StarWarsMovie)

// 3. Add the required ...TinaRemark fragment to your page query
export const pageQuery = graphql`
  query StarWarsMovieById($id: String!) {
    markdownRemark(fields: { id: { eq: $id } }) {
      id
      html
      frontmatter {
        title
        releaseDate
        crawl
      }
      ...TinaRemark
    }
  }
`
```

> The above code is a component that displays information about Star Wars movies. For now, it just displays a header though. But it could also display the release date and the crawl text in the intro to the film as we’re specifying those fields in the GraphQL query. But that’s another story in a galaxy far far away from here ...

Reviewer 2: 😄

The first step in this example is to import the remarkForm hook from the Gatsby plugin ‘gatsby-tinacms-remark’. This is the plugin that makes TinaCMS work with Markdown files.

There’s no need to do any additions to the code inside of the component itself. It could be any component, structured in the way you want it. The only thing you have to do with the component itself is to wrap your component with the remarkForm HOC when you export it.

One more thing you have to do before you are good to go is to add the GraphQL fragment “...TinaRemark” in your query. This is needed for TinaCMS to recognize your data and create the required editor fields in the TinaCMS sidebar. After that you only have to start up your dev server to show the site and the Tina sidebar.

Easy enough isn’t it? Just three small steps and you’ll have a beautiful sidebar to edit your content on your site. 🤟

But what if you want to use a Static query and not a Page query?

###useLocalRemarkForm to the rescue!
We’ve learned that the remarkForm HOC won’t work on static queries. So we’ll have to find another solution to hook up our useStaticQuery data with TinaCMS.

> Great news! remarkForm uses a hook that is called useLocalRemarkForm internally. So RemarkForm is really just a “wrapper” for the useLocalRemarkForm hook. The remarkForm component takes in a component as an argument, calls useLocalRemarkForm with the page query data and returns a new component with the query data and TinaCMS connected to it. That’s all that it does! Therefore we can use the useLocalRemarkForm hook directly ourselves, without using the remarkForm HOC. Please note that you can of course use the useLocalRemarkForm hook on Page queries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Great news! remarkForm uses a hook that is called useLocalRemarkForm internally. So RemarkForm is really just a “wrapper” for the useLocalRemarkForm hook. The remarkForm component takes in a component as an argument, calls useLocalRemarkForm with the page query data and returns a new component with the query data and TinaCMS connected to it. That’s all that it does! Therefore we can use the useLocalRemarkForm hook directly ourselves, without using the remarkForm HOC. Please note that you can also use the useLocalRemarkForm hook on Page queries.
```

As before … Take a look at the code example below first. For the sake of the simplicity in this post I’ve left out code that shows the image. So it just displays a header now.

```javascript
// 1. Import useLocalRemarkForm custom hook
import React from ‘react’;
import { useLocalRemarkForm } from ‘gatsby-tinacms-remark’;
import { useStaticQuery } from ‘gatsby’;

const StarWarsMovie = () => {

>   // 2. Add requried TinaCMS fragment to the GrahpQL query

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // 2. Add required TinaCMS fragment to the GrahpQL query
```

---
title: 3 ways to edit Markdown with Tina + Gatsby

> date: '2020-01-02T07:00:00.000Z'

Author: ```suggestion
date: '2020-01-09T07:00:00.000Z'
```

Let’s say that you have a GraphQL query that grabs metadata that you want on multiple pages. Create a custom React hook with the `useStaticQuery` Gatsby hook inside of it. Then you can use your custom hook wherever you want and always easily get that data into your component. When you need to have variables in your component, you have to use a Page Query. Page Queries cannot be used with the hooks API and have to be unique and attached to the specific page component.

Another great thing with Static Queries is that you can grab the data in the component that needs the data. That prevents [_prop drilling_](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling) and your data is more tightly coupled to the component where it is used.

## React overview

For getting data, we can use Gatsby's query options. For structuring our components, React also offers a couple of options. You can either create your component as a [class or a functional component](https://reactjs.org/docs/components-and-props.html). Before the React Hooks API, you had to use class components to have state in your components. Now with hooks, you can do this with functional components.🥰

## Three ways to edit markdown with Tina

> Given all the options for creating components and sourcing data in Gatsby, we have to choose the most suitable approach for the project. Tina can work with all of these options, providing **three different approaches** for editing Markdown with Gatsby as described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given all the options for creating components and sourcing data in Gatsby, we have to choose the most suitable approach for the project. Tina can work with all of these options, providing [**three different approaches**](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown#creating-remark-forms) for editing Markdown with Gatsby as described below.
```

In this post, we learned about how to _set up Tina with both Static Queries and Page Queries in Gatsby_. We also learned about three different ways to edit markdown with Tina depending on your type of React component.

This is just the basics to get you started. If you like Tina and want to learn more you should check out the [official docs](https://tinacms.org/docs/). There’s a lot more stuff to read there and some interesting use cases.

For example, you can learn how to apply [inline editing](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/inline-editing) and also how to [customize the form fields](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown#customizing-remark-forms) in the Tina sidebar.

Tina is a great addition to the React ecosystem and static site generators like Gatsby. It gives your site a pleasant and easy way to edit and interact with your content.
I’m thrilled to see how big TinaCMS will be and what it can do as it evolves!

## More reading and learning

[Tina Official Documentation](https://tinacms.org/docs/)

[Tina Community](https://community.tinacms.org/)

Tina on Twitter: [@tina_cms](https://twitter.com/tina_cms)

> 

Reviewer: Yeah I think they could be left out on the Tina site, but would be useful on the dev.to article.

> 

Reviewer: @weibenfalk - let's delete these links for the version on the Tina site, but feel free to keep them in cross-publication

_This post will not cover the basics of using Tina with Gatsby. Please reference the [documentation](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/manual-setup) on how to initially set up Tina with Gatsby._

## What’s the deal with Page Queries and Static Queries?

Before we dive down into editing Markdown with Tina we have to understand how Gatsby handles querying data with GraphQL. You can source data from almost anywhere in Gatsby. In our case, we’re using _Markdown_. When you build your site, Gatsby creates a GraphQL schema for all the data. Then you use [GraphQL](https://graphql.org/learn/) in your React components to query your sourced data.

Gatsby allows you to query your data in two ways; _Page Queries and Static Queries_.
Since the release of the [React Hooks API](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-intro.html) and the [`useStaticQuery` hook](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/use-static-query/) in Gatsby, it is very easy to query your data. There are cases when you can’t use a Static Query though. First, let’s explore the differences.

> <tip>

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Tip! As usual, you can find more information in the excellent Gatsby <a href="https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/static-vs-normal-queries/"><b>documentation</b></a>.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> </tip>

Author: ```suggestion
```

### The two main differences are:

- Page Queries can accept GraphQL variables. Static Queries can’t.
- Page Queries can only be added to page components. Static Queries can be used in all components.

So, why can’t we use GraphQL variables in a Static Query? The reason for that is a Static Query doesn’t have access to the page context like a Page Query does. The result is that a Static Query won’t be able to access variables that are defined in the page context. You can define the page context in your `gatsby-node.js` file in your `createPage` function. Here you can supply your page with different variables that will get injected to your page on build time.

> <tip>I use Static Queries as much as possible because I love the hooks API and the ease of composition possibilities it brings. For example, you can create custom hooks and reuse them in multiple components.</tip>

Author: ```suggestion
I use Static Queries as much as possible because I love the hooks API and the ease of composition possibilities it brings. For example, you can create custom hooks and reuse them in multiple components.
```

Let’s say that you have a GraphQL query that grabs metadata that you want on multiple pages. Create a custom React hook with the `useStaticQuery` Gatsby hook inside of it. Then you can use your custom hook wherever you want and always easily get that data into your component. When you need to have variables in your component, you have to use a Page Query. Page Queries cannot be used with the hooks API and have to be unique and attached to the specific page component.

> Another great thing with Static Queries is that you can grab the data in the component that needs the data. That prevents _prop drilling_ and your data is more tightly coupled to the component where it is used.

Author: ```suggestion
Another great thing with Static Queries is that you can grab the data in the component that needs the data. That prevents [_prop drilling_](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling) and your data is more tightly coupled to the component where it is used.
```

> <tip>

Author: ```suggestion
```

> The infamous <a href="https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling"><b>prop drilling</b></a> in React is when you have to pass down data via props to components deep down in the component tree.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> </tip>

Author: ```suggestion
```

## React overview

For getting data, we can use Gatsby's query options. For structuring our components, React also offers a couple of options. You can either create your component as a [class or a functional component](https://reactjs.org/docs/components-and-props.html). Before the React Hooks API, you had to use class components to have state in your components. Now with hooks, you can do this with functional components.🥰

## Three ways to edit markdown with Tina

> Tina provides methods for editing Markdown with both class and functional components in React. We also know that we can have both Page Queries and Static Queries in our Gatsby components. So we have to choose the most suitable approach for us. Tina gives us **three different approaches** as described below.

Author: ```suggestion
Tina provides methods for editing Markdown with both class and functional components in React. We also know that we can have both Page Queries and Static Queries in our Gatsby components. So we have to choose the most suitable approach for us. Tina gives us [**three different approaches**](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown) as described below.
```

Reviewer: @weibenfalk - could you incorporate this change?

Reviewer: @weibenfalk - this one?

- **useLocalRemarkForm** - A React Hook that is intended for functional components that source data from a Static Query using Gatsby’s `useStaticQuery`.
- **RemarkForm** - [A Render Props Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/render-props.html) that you can use in class components that source data from a Static Query using Gatsby’s `StaticQuery` render props component.
- **remarkForm** - [A Higher Order Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html). Please note the subtle difference here! The only difference in naming from the render props component is the lowercase “r”. The `remarkForm` component is used when you source data from a Page Query in Gatsby.

> <tip>

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Tip! If you want to read more about the three different approaches you can visit the <a href="https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown"><b>TinaCMS docs</b></a>.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> </tip>

Author: ```suggestion
```

    details: Demonstrates use of RemarkForm
  - file: /packages/gatsby-tinacms-remark/src/remarkFormHoc.tsx
    details: Shows how to use remarkForm HOC
  - file: /packages/gatsby-tinacms-remark/src/useRemarkForm.tsx
    details: Demonstrates useLocalRemarkForm usage
---

**Supercharge your static site with real-time content editing!**🚀

In this post, I will explore _the three different methods_ Tina offers to edit Markdown on your Gatsby site. You’ll learn how to set up Tina with both Page Queries and Static Queries.

_This post will not cover the basics of using Tina with Gatsby. Please reference the [documentation](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/manual-setup) on how to initially set up Tina with Gatsby._

## What’s the deal with Page Queries and Static Queries?

Before we dive down into editing Markdown with Tina we have to understand how Gatsby handles querying data with GraphQL. You can source data from almost anywhere in Gatsby. In our case, we’re using _Markdown_. When you build your site, Gatsby creates a GraphQL schema for all the data. Then you use [GraphQL](https://graphql.org/learn/) in your React components to query your sourced data.

> Gatsby allows you to query your data in two ways; _Page Queries and Static Queries_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gatsby allows you to query your data in two ways: [_Page Queries and Static Queries_](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/static-vs-normal-queries/).
```

Since the release of the [React Hooks API](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-intro.html) and the [`useStaticQuery` hook](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/use-static-query/) in Gatsby, it is very easy to query your data. There are cases when you can’t use a Static Query though. First, let’s explore the differences.

> <tip>

Reviewer: I think we could delete this tip and simply create a link to this documentation through the italicized _Page Queries and Static Queries_ line.

Tip! As usual, you can find more information in the excellent Gatsby <a href="https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/static-vs-normal-queries/"><b>documentation</b></a>.
</tip>

### The two main differences are:

- Page Queries can accept GraphQL variables. Static Queries can’t.
- Page Queries can only be added to page components. Static Queries can be used in all components.

So, why can’t we use GraphQL variables in a Static Query? The reason for that is a Static Query doesn’t have access to the page context like a Page Query does. The result is that a Static Query won’t be able to access variables that are defined in the page context. You can define the page context in your `gatsby-node.js` file in your `createPage` function. Here you can supply your page with different variables that will get injected to your page on build time.

> <tip>I use Static Queries as much as possible because I love the hooks API and the ease of composition possibilities it brings. For example, you can create custom hooks and reuse them in multiple components.</tip>

Reviewer: This feels less like a 'tip' and more like an opinion? Might be better as a regular paragraph.

Author: Alright ... I used this <tip> tags to lighten up the text a little =) Btw ... have you created your own tag that's named <tip>? That's not a standard html tag?

> Let’s say that you have a graphQL query that grabs metadata that you want on multiple pages. Create a custom React hook with the `useStaticQuery` Gatsby hook inside of it. Then you can use your custom hook wherever you want and always easily get that data into your component. When you need to have variables in your component, you have to use a Page Query. Page Queries cannot be used with the hooks API and have to be unique and attached to the specific page component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s say that you have a GraphQL query that grabs metadata that you want on multiple pages. Create a custom React hook with the `useStaticQuery` Gatsby hook inside of it. Then you can use your custom hook wherever you want and always easily get that data into your component. When you need to have variables in your component, you have to use a Page Query. Page Queries cannot be used with the hooks API and have to be unique and attached to the specific page component.
```

Another great thing with Static Queries is that you can grab the data in the component that needs the data. That prevents _prop drilling_ and your data is more tightly coupled to the component where it is used.

> <tip>

Reviewer: Again I think we could delete this tip and simply link to it via the italicized line.

The infamous <a href="https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling"><b>prop drilling</b></a> in React is when you have to pass down data via props to components deep down in the component tree.
</tip>

## React overview

> As we’ve learned, Gatsby has two types of queries: _Page Queries and Static Queries_. So we have to choose which one is suitable for our needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> In addition to this, React also offers a couple of options for us to choose from. You can either create your component as a [class or a functional component](https://reactjs.org/docs/components-and-props.html). Before the React Hooks API, you had to use class components to have state in your components. Now with hooks, you can do this with functional components.🥰

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For getting data, we can use Gatsby's query options. For structuring our components, React also offers a couple of options. You can either create your component as a [class or a functional component](https://reactjs.org/docs/components-and-props.html). Before the React Hooks API, you had to use class components to have state in your components. Now with hooks, you can do this with functional components.🥰
```

> ## Three ways to edit markdown with Tina

Reviewer: We could think about reordering the list of methods based on the order you use in the post: HOC, hook, then render props

Author: Good point .. missed this one.

> Tina provides methods for editing Markdown with both class and functional components in React. We also know that we can have both Page Queries and Static Queries in our Gatsby components. So we have to choose the most suitable approach for us. Tina gives us **three different approaches** as described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given all the options for creating components and souring data in Gatsby, we have to choose the most suitable approach for the project. Tina can work with all of these options, providing **three different approaches** for editing Markdown with Gatsby as described below.
```

> - **useLocalRemarkForm** - A React Hook that is intended for functional components that source data from a Static Query using Gatsby’s `useStaticQuery`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **useLocalRemarkForm** - A [React Hook](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-overview.html) that is intended for functional components sourcing data from either a Static or a Page Query. If the component is sourcing static data, Gatsby's `useStaticQuery` hook would be called.
```

> - **RemarkForm** - [A Render Props Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/render-props.html) that you can use in class components that source data from a Static Query using Gatsby’s `StaticQuery` render props component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **RemarkForm** - A [Render Props Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/render-props.html) that you can use in class components sourcing data from either a Static or a Page Query. Static data would be sourced via Gatsby’s `StaticQuery` render props component.
```

> - **remarkForm** - [A Higher Order Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html). Please note the subtle difference here! The only difference in naming from the render props component is the lowercase “r”. The `remarkForm` component is used when you source data from a Page Query in Gatsby.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **remarkForm** - A [Higher Order Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html) used when you source data from a Page Query in Gatsby. This component can be utilized with both functional and class components. Please note the subtle difference here! The only difference in naming from the render props component is the lowercase “r”. 
```

<tip>

> Tip! If you want to read more about the three different approaches you can visit the <a href="https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown"><b>TinaCMS docs</b></a>.

Reviewer: We could use this link in the bold **three different approaches** line above and kill this tip.

</tip>

### remarkForm - How to use it and why it won’t work with Static Queries.

> First … Let’s dive into how to hook up TinaCMS with a Page Query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, Let’s dive into how to hook up TinaCMS with a Page Query.
```

The `remarkForm` Component in TinaCMS is a [Higher Order Component](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html), a HOC in short. This means that it is a function that takes in another component and will return a new component that has added functionality to it.

<tip>

> If you’re not familiar with HOC:s I suggest you read about it in the <a href="https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html"><b>React official docs</b></a>. They are considered “advanced usage” in the React world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you’re not familiar with HOC's, I suggest you read about them in the <a href="https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html"><b>React official docs</b></a>. They are considered “advanced usage” in the React world.
```

</tip>

> So … the `remarkForm` component wants another component as an argument and is intended for Page Queries. A Page Query injects the data as a prop to the component and we access the data from this prop. With a `useStaticQuery` hook, the data is collected in a variable, that you choose, inside the component itself. That means if you're using the `useStaticQuery` hook in Gatsby you won’t have a component to give the `remarkForm` HOC. Bummer!😞 That’s why you can only use the `remarkForm` component on Page Queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So … the `remarkForm` component wants another component as an argument and is intended for Page Queries. A Page Query injects the data as a prop to the component and we access the data from this prop. With a `useStaticQuery` hook, the data is collected in a variable, that you choose, inside the component itself. That means if you're using the `useStaticQuery` hook in Gatsby you won’t have a component to give the `remarkForm` HOC. Bummer!😞 That’s why you can only use the `remarkForm` component with Page Queries.
```

> So how do you use this component with a Page Query in Gatsby? First, check out the fictive Star Wars component below. It will show the three steps needed to hook everything up:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So **how do you use this component with a Page Query** in Gatsby? First, check out the fictive Star Wars component below. It will show the three steps needed to hook everything up:
```

```javascript
// 1. Import the `remarkForm` HOC
import { remarkForm } from 'gatsby-tinacms-remark'

const StarWarsMovie = ({ data: { markdownRemark } }) => {
  return <h1>{markdownRemark.frontmatter.title}</h1>
}

// 2. Wrap your component with `remarkForm`
export default remarkForm(StarWarsMovie)

// 3. Add the required ...TinaRemark fragment to your Page Query
export const pageQuery = graphql`
  query StarWarsMovieById($id: String!) {
    markdownRemark(fields: { id: { eq: $id } }) {
      id
      html
      frontmatter {
        title
        releaseDate
        crawl
      }
      ...TinaRemark
    }
  }
`
```

> The above code is a component that displays information about Star Wars movies. For now, it just displays a header though. But it could also display the release date and the crawl text in the intro to the film as we’re specifying those fields in the GraphQL query. But that’s another story in a galaxy far far away ... ⭐

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above code is a component that displays information about Star Wars movies. For now, it just displays a title, but it could also display the release date and the crawl text in the intro to the film. But that’s another story in a galaxy far far away ... ⭐
```

The first step in this example is to import the `remarkForm` hook from the Gatsby plugin ‘gatsby-tinacms-remark’. This is the plugin that _makes TinaCMS work with Markdown files_.

> There’s no need to do any additions to the code inside of the component itself. It could be any component, structured in the way you want it. The only thing you have to do with the component itself is to wrap your component with the `remarkForm` HOC when you export it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There’s no need to do any additions to the code inside of the component itself. It could be any component — functional or class — structured in the way you want it. The only thing you have to do with the component itself is to wrap your component with the `remarkForm` HOC when you export it.
```

One more thing you have to do before you are good to go is to add the GraphQL fragment `...TinaRemark` in your query. This is needed for TinaCMS to recognize your data and create the required editor fields in the TinaCMS sidebar. After that, you only have to start up your dev server to show the site and the Tina sidebar.

Easy enough isn’t it? Just three small steps and you’ll have a beautiful sidebar to edit your content on your site. 🤟

> But what if you want to use a Static Query and not a Page Query?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_But what if you want to use a Static Query and not a Page Query?_
```

### useLocalRemarkForm to the rescue!

> We’ve learned that the `remarkForm` HOC won’t work on Static Queries. So we’ll have to find another solution to hook up our `useStaticQuery` data with TinaCMS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ve learned that the `remarkForm` HOC won’t work on Static Queries. So we’ll have to find another solution for using Static Queries with TinaCMS.
```

> **Great news!** `remarkForm` uses a hook that is called `useLocalRemarkForm` internally. So `RemarkForm` is just a “wrapper” for the `useLocalRemarkForm` hook.👀

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Great news!** 
```

> The `remarkForm` component takes in a component as an argument, calls `useLocalRemarkForm` with the Page Query data and returns a new component with the query data and TinaCMS connected to it. That’s all that it does! Therefore we can use the `useLocalRemarkForm` hook directly ourselves, without using the remarkForm HOC. The good news is that you can also use the `useLocalRemarkForm` hook on Page Queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `remarkForm` component is essentially a "wrapper" for the `useLocalRemarkForm` hook. 👀 It takes in a component as an argument, calls `useLocalRemarkForm` with the Page Query data and returns a new component with the query data and TinaCMS connected to it. 

We can use the `useLocalRemarkForm` hook directly, without using the `remarkForm` HOC. This can be useful with Static Queries or if we just prefer working with hooks!
```

> As before … Take a look at the code example below first. For the sake of the simplicity in this post, I’ve left out code that shows the image. So it just displays a header now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take a look at the code example below to get an idea of how `useLocalRemarkForm` works.
```

```javascript

> // 1. Import useLocalRemarkForm custom hook

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// 1. Import useLocalRemarkForm hook
```

import React from ‘react’;
import { useLocalRemarkForm } from ‘gatsby-tinacms-remark’;
import { useStaticQuery } from ‘gatsby’;

const StarWarsMovie = () => {
  // 2. Add required TinaCMS fragment to the GrahpQL query
    const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`
      query StarWarsMovieById {
        markdownRemark(fields: { id: { eq: "sw-01" } }) {
          id
          html
          frontmatter {
            title
            releaseDate
            crawl
          }
          ...TinaRemark
        }
      }
    `);
  // 3. Call the useLocalRemarkForm hook and pass in the data
  const [markdownRemark] = useLocalRemarkForm(data.markdownRemark);
  return <h1>{markdownRemark.frontmatter.title}</h1>
}

export default StarWarsMovie;
```

> This is just an example component illustrating how `useLocalRemarkForm` works. In the real world, it would not be an optimal solution using a Static Query for this. That’s because, as you can see, you can’t use variables inside the `useStaticQuery` hook to make it dynamic. You have to hardcode the movie id. So this query will work for that specific movie only, which is no good.

Reviewer: I think we could delete this whole paragraph.

Author: Is it ok to keep this? I think it's important to really point this out. Don't want people to think that you should build it like this. It's no good ... =) It will also look like I don't know how to write proper code so that's not good for me personally either =)

Reviewer: I see, in my opinion since its such a simple example I don't see it that way. I just don't see the 'disclaimer' adding much to the educational content. But i'll leave it up to you if you want to leave it in!

> This is just an example component illustrating how `useLocalRemarkForm` works. In the real world, it would not be an optimal solution using a Static Query for this. That’s because, as you can see, you can’t use variables inside the `useStaticQuery` hook to make it dynamic. You have to hardcode the movie id. So this query will work for that specific movie only, which is no good.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Let’s break down what’s happening here:

1. We import the `useLocalRemarkForm` custom hook so we can use it in our component.
2. Just as before, the `...TinaRemark` fragment is needed in the GraphQL query. So we add that one there.
3. When we’ve got our data back from the Gatsby `useStaticQuery` hook we can call the TinaCMS `useLocalRemarkForm` hook with that data. This hook will return an array with two elements. The first element is practically the data that we called the hook with. It has the same shape and is ready for us to use in our component. The second element is a reference to the Tina form. We don’t need that one so we don’t destructure it out as we do with the `markdownRemark`.

If you're wondering about this line:

```javascript
const [markdownRemark] = useLocalRemarkForm(heroData.markdownRemark)
```

It is an example of [ES6 destructuring](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment). As we get an array with two elements back, I destructure out the first element (which is our data) and name it `markdownRemark`. You can name it whatever you want.

### RemarkForm - The Render Prop Component

> You can’t use React Hooks on class components. That’s why Tina provides a `RemarkForm` component that uses the render prop pattern. You can read more about render props in the official [React docs](https://reactjs.org/docs/render-props.html). Note the naming here! his one has a capital “R” which is different from the HOC. This component works with both Page- and Static Queries. I will show how to use it with a Page Query below. If you want to learn more about the render prop component and how to use it with a Static Query you can visit the official [Tina docs](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can’t use React Hooks on class components. That’s why Tina provides a [`RemarkForm`](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown/#2-the-render-props-component-remarkform) component that uses the [Render Props](https://reactjs.org/docs/render-props.html) pattern. 

This component works with both Page and Static Queries. I will show how to use it with a Page Query below. 
```

Take a look at below example:

```javascript
// 1. import the RemarkForm render prop component
import { RemarkForm } from '@tinacms/gatsby-tinacms-remark'

class StarWarsMovie extends React.Component {
  render() {
    /*
     ** 2. Return RemarkForm, pass in markdownRemark
     **    to the remark prop and pass in what you
     **    want to render to the render prop
     */
    return (
      <RemarkForm
        remark={this.props.data.markdownRemark}
        render={({ markdownRemark }) => {
          return <h1>{markdownRemark.frontmatter.title}</h1>
        }}
      />
    )
  }
}

export default StarWarsMovie

// 3. Add the required ...TinaRemark fragment to your Page Query
export const pageQuery = graphql`
  query StarWarsMovieById($id: String!) {
    markdownRemark(fields: { id: { eq: $id } }) {
      id
      html
      frontmatter {
        title
        releaseDate
        crawl
      }
      ...TinaRemark
    }
  }
`
```

Ok, yet again, let’s see what’s happening here:

> 

Reviewer: Given the length of the list items here, you might want to refactor out of a list so the paragraph breaks will show 🤷🏻‍♀️

1. We import the `RemarkForm` component for us to use in our code.

> 2. In our return statement we return the `RemarkForm` component and give it it’s predefined, and required props. The remark prop will provide `RemarkForm` with the data that we grabbed from our markdown file with our Page Query. We get this data injected into our page component in the data prop. So we pass that through. We just need the `markdownRemark` from the data object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In our return statement we return the `RemarkForm` component and pass in it's predefined, and required props. The remark prop provides `RemarkForm` with the markdown data sourced from the Page Query. 
```

>    The render prop gets the JSX that we want to render. In this case, it’s only an H1 tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>    This is a function that will be called by the `RemarkForm` component. And this is a render prop! `RemarkForm` will hook up Tina for editing the data and then render whatever is specified in the render prop function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

3. Just as before we have to add the `...TinaRemark` fragment to the Page Query.

> **This is it**. Three ways of using Tina for editing frontmatter files in Gatsby.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Next steps

> In this post, we learned about how to _set up Tina with both Static Queries and Page Queries in Gatsby_. We also learned about three different ways to edit markdown with Tina. This is just the basics to get you started. If you like Tina and want to learn more you should check out the [Tina official docs](https://tinacms.org/docs/). There’s a lot more stuff to read there and some interesting use cases. For example, you can learn how to apply [inline editing](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/inline-editing) and also how to [customize the form fields](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown#customizing-remark-forms) in the Tina sidebar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**That's it**! Three ways of using Tina for editing Markdown files in Gatsby. 🎉

In this post, we learned about how to _set up Tina with both Static Queries and Page Queries in Gatsby_. We also learned about three different ways to edit markdown with Tina depending on your type of React component. 

This is just the basics to get you started. If you like Tina and want to learn more you should check out the [Tina official docs](https://tinacms.org/docs/). There’s a lot more stuff to read there and some interesting use cases. 

For example, you can learn how to apply [inline editing](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/inline-editing) and also how to [customize the form fields](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown#customizing-remark-forms) in the Tina sidebar.
```
